docs: RHTAP-1068: chore: Add e2e guidelines (#784)
redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests: docs/Guidelines.md

# Overview
The purpose of *this* document is to serve as a primer for developers/qe who are looking for best practices or adding new tests to RHTAP E2E framework.

## General tips

* Make sure you've implemented any required controller functionality that is required for your tests within the following files

>    * `pkg/utils/<new controller directory>` - net new controller logic for a new service or component

Reviewer: net?

   * `pkg/framework/framework.go` - import the new controller and update the `Framework` struct to be able to initialize the new controller
* Every test package should be imported to `cmd/e2e_test.go`, e.g. [byoc](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/blob/main/cmd/e2e_test.go#L15).
* Every new test should have correct [labels](docs/LabelsNaming.md).

> * Every test should have meaningful description with JIRA/GitHub issue key.

Reviewer 2: This is not clear to me. Say, we added a new functionality to our operator and have to test it. What should be added in such case? GitHub PR link?

Author: That is up to your team. You can keep the link to the initial feature request or update with the new JiraKey

* (Recommended) Use JIRA integration for linking issues and commits (just add JIRA issue key in the commit message).
* When running via mage you can filter the suites run by specifying the
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL` environment variable. For example:
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL=ec ./mage runE2ETests`
* `klog` level can be controled via `KLOG_VERBOSITY` environment variable. For
  example: `KLOG_VERBOSITY=9 ./mage runE2ETests` would output http requests
  issued via Kubernetes client from sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime
* To quickly debug a test, you can run only the desired suite. Example: `./bin/e2e-appstudio --ginkgo.focus="e2e-demos-suite"`
* Split tests in multiple scenarios. It's better to debug a small scenario than a very big one

## Debuggability

If your test fails, it should provide as detailed as possible reasons for the failure in its failure message. The failure message is the string that gets passed (directly or indirectly) to ginkgo.Fail[f].

A good failure message:
* identifies the test failure
* has enough details to provide some initial understanding of what went wrong

> It is good practice to include details like the object that failed some assertion in the failure message because then a) the information is available when analyzing a failure that occurred in the CI and b) it only gets logged when some assertion fails. Always dumping objects via log messages can make the test output very large and may distract from the relevant information.

Reviewer 3: :-)

Dumping structs with `format.Object` is recommended. Starting with Kubernetes 1.26, format.Object will pretty-print Kubernetes API objects or structs as YAML and omit unset fields, which is more readable than other alternatives like `fmt.Sprintf("%+v")`.

```golang
import (
    "fmt"
    "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    "k8s.io/kubernetes/test/utils/format"
)

var pod v1.Pod
fmt.Printf("format.Object:\n%s", format.Object(pod, 1 /* indent one level */))

format.Object:
    <v1.Pod>:
        metadata:
          creationTimestamp: null
        spec:
          containers: null
        status: {}
```
## Polling and timeouts

When waiting for something to happen, use a reasonable timeout. Without it, a test might keep running until the entire test suite gets killed by the CI. **Beware that the CI under load may take a lot longer to complete some operation compared to running the same test locally**. On the other hand, a too long timeout also has drawbacks:

* When a feature is broken so that the expected state doesn’t get reached, a test waiting for that state first needs to time out before the test fails.

> * If a state is expected to be reached within a certain time frame, then a timeout that is much higher will cause test runs to be considered successful although the feature was too slow. A dedicated performance test in a well-known environment may be a better solution for testing such performance expectations.

Reviewer 2: I don't see this as a drawback of the above. If operations are much slower due to high load on CI we shouldn't fail I believe. As it was mentioned, there are performance tests for controlling execution time, here we concentrate on correctness.

Author: Yes, but we need to prepare propper timeouts of our tests when execute in CI. As I mention is not the same like ur local computer. Setting properly waits is the correctness here.

# Overview

> The purpose of *this* document is to serve as a primer for developers/qe who are looking for best practices or add tests to RHTAP E2E framework.

Reviewer 4: I would change "or add tests" to "or adding new tests" or "or to add new tests".

## General tips

* Make sure you've implemented any required controller functionality that is required for your tests within the following files
   * `pkg/utils/<new controller directory>` - net new controller logic for a new service or component
   * `pkg/framework/framework.go` - import the new controller and update the `Framework` struct to be able to initialize the new controller

> * Every test package should be imported to `cmd/e2e_test.go`, e.g. [has](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/blob/main/cmd/e2e_test.go#L15).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Every test package should be imported to `cmd/e2e_test.go`, e.g. [byoc](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/blob/main/cmd/e2e_test.go#L15).
```

Reviewer 6: imo there should be a permanent link, so it doesn't change in a future, i.e. https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/blob/b3f6894dd039533a34385092ba123b3e3d940d98/cmd/e2e_test.go#L15

* Every new test should have correct [labels](docs/LabelsNaming.md).
* Every test should have meaningful description with JIRA/GitHub issue key.
* (Recommended) Use JIRA integration for linking issues and commits (just add JIRA issue key in the commit message).
* When running via mage you can filter the suites run by specifying the
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL` environment variable. For example:
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL=ec ./mage runE2ETests`
* `klog` level can be controled via `KLOG_VERBOSITY` environment variable. For

>   example: `KLOG_VERBOSITY=9 ./mage runE2ETests` would output `curl` commands

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  example: `KLOG_VERBOSITY=9 ./mage runE2ETests` would output http requests
```

  issued via Kubernetes client from sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime
* To quickly debug a test, you can run only the desired suite. Example: `./bin/e2e-appstudio --ginkgo.focus="e2e-demos-suite"`

> * Split tests in different scenarios. Will be better to debug a small scenario than a very big one

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Split tests in multiple scenarios. It's better to debug a small scenario than a very big one
```

## Debuggability

If your test fails, it should provide as detailed as possible reasons for the failure in its failure message. The failure message is the string that gets passed (directly or indirectly) to ginkgo.Fail[f].

A good failure message:
* identifies the test failure
* has enough details to provide some initial understanding of what went wrong

It is good practice to include details like the object that failed some assertion in the failure message because then a) the information is available when analyzing a failure that occurred in the CI and b) it only gets logged when some assertion fails. Always dumping objects via log messages can make the test output very large and may distract from the relevant information.

Dumping structs with `format.Object` is recommended. Starting with Kubernetes 1.26, format.Object will pretty-print Kubernetes API objects or structs as YAML and omit unset fields, which is more readable than other alternatives like `fmt.Sprintf("%+v")`.

```golang
import (
    "fmt"
    "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    "k8s.io/kubernetes/test/utils/format"
)

var pod v1.Pod
fmt.Printf("format.Object:\n%s", format.Object(pod, 1 /* indent one level */))

> format.Object:

Reviewer 5: Will it be good to keep the output of the code outside the code block?

Author: in this case is irrelevant, is an example of how code works

    <v1.Pod>:
        metadata:
          creationTimestamp: null
        spec:
          containers: null
        status: {}
```
## Polling and timeouts

When waiting for something to happen, use a reasonable timeout. Without it, a test might keep running until the entire test suite gets killed by the CI. **Beware that the CI under load may take a lot longer to complete some operation compared to running the same test locally**. On the other hand, a too long timeout also has drawbacks:

* When a feature is broken so that the expected state doesn’t get reached, a test waiting for that state first needs to time out before the test fails.

> * If a state is expected to be reached within a certain time frame, then a timeout that is much higher will cause test runs to be considered successful although the feature was too slow. A dedicated performance test in a well-know environment may be a better solution for testing such performance expectations.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* If a state is expected to be reached within a certain time frame, then a timeout that is much higher will cause test runs to be considered successful although the feature was too slow. A dedicated performance test in a well-known environment may be a better solution for testing such performance expectations.
```

Good code that waits for something to happen meets the following criteria:
* accepts a context for test timeouts
* full explanation when it fails: when it observes some state and then encounters errors reading the state, then dumping both the latest observed state and the latest error is useful
* early abort when condition cannot be reached anymore

> ### Tips for writing and debugging long-running tests

Reviewer 7: Do we want to make reference and recommend that they generate their tests using our tooling documented in the DeveloperGeneratingTest.doc?

Author: We already do that in the main page. Not sure if is ok to repeat this so much time

* Use `ginkgo.By` to record individual steps. Ginkgo will use that information when describing where a test timed out.

> * Use [gomega.Eventually](https://) to wait for some condition. When it times out or gets stuck, the last failed assertion will be included in the report automatically. A good way to invoke it is:

Reviewer 5: Did you mean to add the link for `gomega.Eventually`?

```go

> 	// Before injecting the token, validate that the linkedaccesstoken resource exists, otherwise injecting will return a 404 error code

Reviewer 5: Maybe we can omit the comments here .. is not relevant in this context ?

	Eventually(func() bool {
		// application info should be stored even after deleting the application in application variable
		_, err := s.GetSPIAccessToken(linkedAccessTokenName, namespace)
		return err == nil

> 	}, 1*time.Minute, 100*time.Millisecond).Should(BeTrue(), "SPI controller didn't create the SPIAccessToken")

Reviewer 6: to be aligned with what was written in the previous section of "Debuggability" I would change the return type of a func that is passed into `Eventually`:

```suggestion
	Eventually(func() error {
		// application info should be stored even after deleting the application in application variable
		_, err := s.GetSPIAccessToken(linkedAccessTokenName, namespace)
		return err
	}, 1*time.Minute, 100*time.Millisecond).Should(Succeed(), "SPI controller didn't create the SPIAccessToken")
```
in this case, if Eventually will timeout, it will print out the value of the `error`, instead of "expected \<bool\> to be true", which doesn't hold much information

and I think it's worth to point out in the guide that the return type of functions passed to `Eventually` should always be something that tells us as much as information about what went wrong
